engine: upgrade docusaurus to 2.4 (#1528)
redpanda-data/documentation: modules/manage/pages/schema-reg/schema-reg-authorization.adoc

For additional guidance on these operations, see the link:/api/doc/schema-registry/operation/operation-get_security_acls[Redpanda Schema Registry API].

> === Understanding Schema Registry operations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Operation definitions
```

> The following operations are used to control access to Schema Registry resources:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use the following operations to control access to Schema Registry resources:
```

> * **`read`**: Allows reading schemas and their content. Required for consuming messages that use Schema Registry, fetching specific schema versions, and reading schema content by ID.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **`read`**: Allows user to read schemas and their content. Required for consuming messages that use Schema Registry, fetching specific schema versions, and reading schema content by ID.
```

> * **`write`**: Allows registering new schemas and schema versions. Required for producing messages with new schemas and updating existing subjects with new schema versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **`write`**: Allows user to register new schemas and schema versions. Required for producing messages with new schemas and updating existing subjects with new schema versions.
```

> * **`delete`**: Allows deleting schema versions and subjects. Required for cleanup operations and removing deprecated schemas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **`delete`**: Allows user to delete schema versions and subjects. Required for cleanup operations and removing deprecated schemas.
```

> * **`describe`**: Allows listing and describing Schema Registry resources. Required for discovering available subjects, listing schema versions, and viewing metadata.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **`describe`**: Allows user to list and describe Schema Registry resources. Required for discovering available subjects, listing schema versions, and viewing metadata.
```

> * **`describe_configs`**: Allows reading configuration settings. Required for viewing compatibility settings, reading modes (IMPORT/READWRITE), and checking global or per-subject configurations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **`describe_configs`**: Allows user to read configuration settings. Required for viewing compatibility settings, reading modes (IMPORT/READWRITE), and checking global or per-subject configurations.
```

> * **`alter_configs`**: Allows modifying configuration settings. Required for changing compatibility levels, setting IMPORT mode for migrations, and updating global or per-subject configurations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **`alter_configs`**: Allows user to modify configuration settings. Required for changing compatibility levels, setting IMPORT mode for migrations, and updating global or per-subject configurations.
```

=== Common use cases

The following examples show which operations are required for common Schema Registry tasks:

==== Schema Registry migration

When migrating schemas between clusters, the destination user needs:

[,bash]
----
# For reading schemas from source and writing to target
rpk security acl create \
  --allow-principal migrator-user \
  --operation read,write,describe,alter_configs,describe_configs \
  --registry-global
----

This grants:

* `read` - Read schemas by ID from source
* `write` - Register schemas in target with preserved IDs
* `describe` - List all subjects in source
* `describe_configs` - Read compatibility settings and mode
* `alter_configs` - Set IMPORT mode on target Schema Registry

[NOTE]
====
The target Schema Registry must be in IMPORT mode to preserve schema IDs during migration. Only superusers or principals with `alter_configs` permission on the `registry` resource can change the global mode. See xref:manage:schema-reg/schema-reg-api.adoc#set-global-mode[Set global mode].
====

==== Read-only access for consumers

> Applications that only consume messages with schemas need:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Applications that only consume messages with schemas require:
```

[,bash]
----
# For consuming with schema validation
rpk security acl create \
  --allow-principal consumer-app \
  --operation read \
  --registry-subject "orders-*"
----

This allows:

* Reading schema content by ID (embedded in messages)
* Viewing specific schema versions

> * Does NOT allow listing all subjects or modifying schemas

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Does _not_ allow listing all subjects or modifying schemas
```

==== Producer access

> Applications that produce messages with schemas need:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Applications that produce messages with schemas require:
```

[,bash]
----
# For producing with new schemas
rpk security acl create \
  --allow-principal producer-app \
  --operation read,write,describe \
  --registry-subject "orders-*"
----

This allows:

* Checking if schemas already exist (`describe`)
* Reading existing schema versions (`read`)
* Registering new schema versions (`write`)

==== Schema administrator access

> Schema administrators who manage compatibility and cleanup need:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Schema administrators who manage compatibility and cleanup require:
```

[,bash]
----
# For full schema management
rpk security acl create \
  --allow-principal schema-admin \
  --operation all \
  --registry-global
----

> This grants all operations including:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This grants all operations, including:
```

* **`write`**: Allows user to register new schemas and schema versions. Required for producing messages with new schemas and updating existing subjects with new schema versions.
* **`delete`**: Allows user to delete schema versions and subjects. Required for cleanup operations and removing deprecated schemas.
* **`describe`**: Allows user to list and describe Schema Registry resources. Required for discovering available subjects, listing schema versions, and viewing metadata.
* **`describe_configs`**: Allows user to read configuration settings. Required for viewing compatibility settings, reading modes (IMPORT/READWRITE), and checking global or per-subject configurations.
* **`alter_configs`**: Allows user to modify configuration settings. Required for changing compatibility levels, setting IMPORT mode for migrations, and updating global or per-subject configurations.

=== Common use cases

The following examples show which operations are required for common Schema Registry tasks:

==== Schema Registry migration

> When migrating schemas between clusters, you need **different ACLs for source and target clusters**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When migrating schemas between clusters, you must have **different ACLs for source and target clusters**.
```

**Source cluster (read-only):**

[,bash]
----
# Read schemas from source Schema Registry
rpk security acl create \
  --allow-principal User:migrator-user \
  --operation read,describe \
  --registry-global \
  --brokers <source-brokers>
----

This grants:

* `read` - Read schemas by ID from source
* `describe` - List all subjects in source

[NOTE]
====

> The `describe_configs` operation is required to read Schema Registry configuration settings including compatibility modes and IMPORT mode status.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `describe_configs` operation is required to read Schema Registry configuration settings, including compatibility modes and IMPORT mode status.
```

====

**Target cluster (read-write):**

[,bash]
----
# Write schemas to target Schema Registry and manage IMPORT mode
rpk security acl create \
  --allow-principal User:migrator-user \
  --operation write,describe,alter_configs,describe_configs \
  --registry-global \
  --brokers <target-brokers>
----

This grants:

* `write` - Register schemas in target with preserved IDs
* `describe` - List all subjects in target
* `describe_configs` - Read compatibility settings and mode

> * `alter_configs` - Set IMPORT mode on target Schema Registry

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `alter_configs` - Set IMPORT mode on target Schema Registry
* `describe_configs` - Read compatibility settings and mode
```

Reviewer: Placing is same order that they appear in the example^^

[IMPORTANT]
====

> **Schema Registry ACLs are only for Schema Registry operations.** For complete data migration, you also need Kafka ACLs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Schema Registry ACLs are only for Schema Registry operations.** For complete data migration, you must also use Kafka ACLs:
```

* **Topics:** READ (source), WRITE/CREATE/DESCRIBE/ALTER (target)
* **Consumer groups:** READ (source), CREATE/READ (target)
* **Cluster:** DESCRIBE (both), CREATE (target)

See xref:manage:security/authorization/acl.adoc[Configure Access Control Lists] for Kafka ACL configuration.
====

[NOTE]
====
The target Schema Registry must be in IMPORT mode to preserve schema IDs during migration. Only superusers or principals with `alter_configs` permission on the `registry` resource can change the global mode.
ifndef::env-cloud[]
See xref:manage:schema-reg/schema-reg-api.adoc#set-global-mode[Set global mode].
endif::[]
ifdef::env-cloud[]
See xref:schema-reg:schema-reg-api.adoc#set-global-mode[Set global mode].
endif::[]
====

==== Complete migration setup workflow

For a complete migration setup, follow this workflow:

> 1. **Bootstrap superusers** - Configure superusers via `.bootstrap.yaml` before enabling authentication

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Bootstrap superusers** - Configure superusers using `.bootstrap.yaml` before enabling authentication
```

2. **Create migration user** - Create dedicated migration user with minimal required permissions
3. **Configure Schema Registry ACLs** - Grant read access on source, read-write access on target
4. **Configure Kafka ACLs** - Grant topic read/write, consumer group, and cluster permissions
5. **Enable SASL authentication** - Enable SASL/SCRAM-SHA-256 on both clusters
6. **Enable ACL authorization** - Enable `kafka_enable_authorization` and `schema_registry_enable_authorization`
7. **Set target to IMPORT mode** - Enable IMPORT mode on target Schema Registry
8. **Start migration** - Begin data and schema migration
9. **Verify ACLs** - Test that permissions work correctly and restrictions are enforced
10. **Complete migration** - Disable IMPORT mode after migration completes

> For a complete working example with Docker Compose, see the https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda-labs/tree/main/docker-compose/redpanda-migrator-demo[Redpanda Migrator Demo].

Reviewer: This link is not working. Is the Demo/lab merged @vuldin ?

[NOTE]
====
**Schema Registry Internal Client Authentication:** When SASL authentication is enabled on your Kafka cluster, the Schema Registry's internal Kafka client must also be configured with SASL credentials. Configure these using node-level properties:

[,bash]
----
--set schema_registry_client.scram_username=<username>
--set schema_registry_client.scram_password=<password>
--set schema_registry_client.sasl_mechanism=SCRAM-SHA-256
----

Without these credentials, Schema Registry operations that interact with Kafka (like storing schema data) will fail with "broker_not_available" errors.
====

==== Read-only access for consumers

Applications that only consume messages with schemas require:

[,bash]
----
# For consuming with schema validation
rpk security acl create \
  --allow-principal consumer-app \
  --operation read \
  --registry-subject "orders-*" \
  --resource-pattern-type prefixed
----

This allows:

* Reading schema content by ID (embedded in messages)
* Viewing specific schema versions

> * Does _not_ allow listing all subjects or modifying schemas

Reviewer: ```suggestion

This does _not_ allow listing all subjects or modifying schemas.
```

  --registry-subject "orders-*" \
  --resource-pattern-type prefixed
----

This allows:

* Checking if schemas already exist (`describe`)
* Reading existing schema versions (`read`)
* Registering new schema versions (`write`)

==== Schema administrator access

Schema administrators who manage compatibility and cleanup require:

[,bash]
----
# For full schema management
rpk security acl create \
  --allow-principal schema-admin \
  --operation all \
  --registry-global
----

This grants all operations, including:

* Managing compatibility settings
* Deleting deprecated schemas
* Viewing and modifying configurations
* Listing all subjects and schemas

=== Pattern-based ACLs for Schema Registry

When using subject name patterns (like `orders-*`), always specify `--resource-pattern-type prefixed`:

[,bash]
----
# Correct - matches all subjects starting with "orders-"
rpk security acl create \
  --allow-principal User:app \
  --operation read \
  --registry-subject "orders-" \
  --resource-pattern-type prefixed

# Incorrect - treats "orders-*" as literal subject name
rpk security acl create \
  --allow-principal User:app \
  --operation read \
  --registry-subject "orders-*"
----

> 
> Pattern types:
> * **`prefixed`** - Matches subjects starting with the specified string (e.g., `orders-` matches `orders-value`, `orders-key`)
> * **`literal`** - Matches exact subject name only (default if not specified)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pattern types:

* **`prefixed`** - Matches subjects starting with the specified string (for example, `orders-` matches `orders-value`, `orders-key`)
* **`literal`** - Matches exact subject name only (default if not specified)
```

[,bash]
----
{"error_code":50302,"message":"{ node: -1 }, { error_code: broker_not_available [8] }"}
----

**Cause:** The Schema Registry's internal Kafka client is not configured with SASL credentials.

**Solution:** Configure the Schema Registry client credentials:

[,bash]
----
rpk cluster config set schema_registry_client.scram_username <username>
rpk cluster config set schema_registry_client.scram_password <password>
rpk cluster config set schema_registry_client.sasl_mechanism SCRAM-SHA-256
----

Then restart the Schema Registry service.

==== Pattern-based ACL not working

If a pattern-based ACL (like `orders-*`) is not matching expected subjects:

**Cause:** Missing `--resource-pattern-type prefixed` flag.

**Solution:** Recreate the ACL with the correct pattern type:

[,bash]
----
# Delete incorrect ACL
rpk security acl delete \
  --allow-principal User:app \
  --operation read \
  --registry-subject "orders-*"

# Create correct ACL with pattern type
rpk security acl create \
  --allow-principal User:app \
  --operation read \
  --registry-subject "orders-" \
  --resource-pattern-type prefixed
----

> Note: Pattern matching uses the string without the asterisk when using `prefixed` type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[NOTE]
==== 
Pattern matching uses the string without the asterisk when using `prefixed` type.
==== 
```
